BRIP-0003: Stable block time (#6)
berachain/BRIPs: meta/BRIP-0003.md

---
mip: 0003
title: Stable Block Time
author: aBear, fridrik01
status: Draft
created: 2025-06-16
type: Core
---

## Summary

> Stable Block Time (SBT) introduces a mechanism for ensuring consistent block intervals in CometBFT-based blockchains. This enables the Berachain network to target a fixed block production interval (e.g., one block every 2 seconds), thus stabilizing BGT inflation in the absence of network partition issues.

Reviewer: would add a small clarification in summary that this stabilizes the average block time over a large interval but doesn't lead to precise slot times as in Eth2.0

Author: Done

SBT proposes an algorithmic delay model that dynamically adjusts based on the difference between the actual and expected block times, using a well-defined initial time and height checkpoint. The expected time for the next block is calculated as:

```go
expectedBlockTime := initialTime + (TargetBlockTime * (currentBlockHeight-initialHeight))
```

where
- `TargetBlockTime` is the desired interval between blocks
- `initialTime` and `initialHeight` are the time and height of the well-defined checkpoint
- `currentBlockHeight` is the height of the current block

This formula ensures that CometBFT adds delays when blocks are produced early, proceeds immediately when blocks are on time, and allows rapid catch-up when blocks are late - all to maintain the long-term average block time at the target interval.

> Finally, SBT proposes a minor modification to the logic above, to account for chain halts. While Berachain chain is meant to produce blocks non-stop, prolonged halts due to downtime, upgrades or bugs are always possible. If they were to happen, the algorithm above would force blocks to be produced as fast as possible in order to catch up with the downtime.

Reviewer: small nit
```suggestion
Finally, SBT proposes a minor modification to the logic above, to account for chain halts. While Berachain chain is meant to produce blocks continuously, prolonged halts due to downtime, upgrades or bugs are always possible. If they were to happen, the algorithm above would force blocks to be produced as fast as possible in order to catch up with the downtime.
```

  d.PreviousBlockTime = curBlockTime

  expectedTime := d.InitialTime.Add(TargetBlockTime * time.Duration(curBlockHeight - d.InitialHeight))
  if curBlockTime.Before(expectedTime) {
    return expectedTime.Sub(curBlockTime)
  }
  return noDelay
}
```

To prevent rapid block generation after a prolonged halt (e.g., due to downtime or upgrades), the internal checkpoint is reset after `MaxDelayBetweenBlocks` - the maximum delay between two consecutive blocks. `MaxDelayBetweenBlocks` is set to `5 minutes`, which balances distinguishing real halts from network congestion while avoiding excessive catch-up.

To make this work, BeaconKit keeps track of `PreviousBlockTime`. BeaconKit must persist this, along with `initialTime` and `initialHeight`, for every block (on Commit) to ensure crash recovery.

### State Sync Support

Currently, SBT does not support [state sync](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/explanation/core/state-sync). If a node syncs from a height greater than SBTEnableHeight, BeaconKit lacks access to the latest initialTime. In this version, such scenarios must panic:

Future versions may introduce support for persisting and recovering SBT state from snapshots.

## Rationale

> SBT leverages [Predictable Block Times](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/docs/references/architecture/adr-115-predictable-block-times.md) feature from CometBFT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SBT leverages the [Predictable Block Times](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/docs/references/architecture/adr-115-predictable-block-times.md) feature from CometBFT.
```

## Backward Compatibility

> A hard fork is required to enable these changes. This change does not affect execution clients, so it is fully backward-compatible with existing wallets and applications.

Reviewer: Can we add a small description why SBT cannot be implemented at a timestamp (like our hardforks do) but must be activated at a block height specifically?

Finally SBT proposes a minor modification to the logic above, to account for chain halts. While Berachain chain is meant to produce blocks no stop, prolonged halts due to downtime, upgrades or bugs are always possible. If they ever to happen, the algorithm above would force blocks to be produced as fast as possible in order to catch up with the downtime.

To avoid unintended block rushes, SBT proposes a reset policy for the internal checkpoint `(initialTime, initialHeight)`: if the time between blocks exceeds a `MaxDelayBetweenBlocks`, `initialTime` is reset to the current block as if the upgrade happened just now. This ensures stable timing resumes from the current block, avoiding rushes.

## Specification

### SBTEnableHeight consensus parameter

Similarly to `vote_extensions_enable_height`, to ensure consistency across the network, a new consensus parameter is introduced:

```go
type Feature struct {
  SBTEnableHeight int64 `json:"sbt_enable_height"`
}
```

By default, SBT is disabled:

```go
Feature{

>   SBTEnableHeight: 0,

Reviewer 2: This is slightly inconsistent with EL forks, where 0 value means enabled at genesis. Not a big deal

Reviewer 2: How would I enable this from genesis on local network?

Author: This is Comet consensus parameter, and we are bound to follow Comet semantics

}
```

> When `SBTEnableHeight > 0`, BeaconKit must activate SBT logic starting at the specified height.

Reviewer 2: How would I enable this from genesis on local network?

Author: Actually very good point. The short answer is you cannot. We are introducing an ad-hoc consensus parameter here, which was not available in genesis. The least we can do is to activate it from block 1. Will note it down

To make this work, BeaconKit keeps track of `PreviousBlockTime`. BeaconKit must persist this, along with initialTime & initialHeight, for every block (on Commit) to ensure crash recovery.

### Statesync support

Currently, SBT does not support [state sync](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/explanation/core/state-sync). If a node syncs from a height greater than SBTEnableHeight, BeaconKit lacks access to the latest initialTime. In this version, such scenarios must panic:

Future versions may introduce support for persisting and recovering SBT state from the snapshot.

## Rationale

SBT leverages [Predictable Block Times](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/docs/references/architecture/adr-115-predictable-block-times.md) feature from CometBFT.

## Backward Compatibility

A hard fork is required to enable these changes. This change does not affect the execution clients so it is fully backward-compatible with existing wallet and applications.

## Security Considerations

> Any security risks or mitigations.

Reviewer 2: Maybe remove this section or populate
